Trim the manuscript more (#449)
AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-manuscript: content/04.discussion.md

## Discussion

The CBTN released the PBTA raw genomic data in September 2018 without embargo, allowing researchers immediate access to begin making discoveries on behalf of children with CNS tumors everywhere.
Since this publication, the CBTN has approved over 200 data research projects [@doi:10.1016/j.neo.2022.100846] from 69 different institutions, with 60% from non-CBTN sites.
We created OpenPBTA as an open, real-time, reproducible analysis framework to genomically characterize pediatric brain tumors, bringing together basic and translational researchers, clinicians, and data scientists.
We provide reusable code and data resources, paired with cloud-based availability of source and derived data resources, to the pediatric oncology community, encouraging interdisciplinary collaboration.

> To our knowledge, this initiative represents the first large-scale, collaborative, open analysis of genomic data coupled with open manuscript writing, wherein we comprehensively analyzed the largest cohort of pediatric brain tumors to date.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To our knowledge, this initiative represents the first large-scale, collaborative, open analysis of genomic data coupled with open manuscript writing, wherein we comprehensively analyzed the PBTA.
```

## Discussion

> The CBTN released the PBTA raw genomic data in September 2018 without embargo to accelerate therapeutic translation for children with cancer.

Reviewer: This is language from the CBTN mission from Adam, so if we can keep, then maybe we leave. If not, this sounds fine.

Author: Went for a middle ground: https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-manuscript/pull/449/commits/7e3e9a3be5fd64dd9d49031ef6ca276d29aebf02

Author: Went for a middle ground: https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-manuscript/pull/449/commits/7e3e9a3be5fd64dd9d49031ef6ca276d29aebf02

Author: Went for a middle ground: https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/OpenPBTA-manuscript/pull/449/commits/7e3e9a3be5fd64dd9d49031ef6ca276d29aebf02

> Since this release, the CBTN has approved over 200 data research projects [@doi:10.1016/j.neo.2022.100846] from 69 different institutions, with 60% from non-CBTN sites.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since this publication, the CBTN has approved over 200 data research projects [@doi:10.1016/j.neo.2022.100846] from 69 different institutions, with 60% from non-CBTN sites.
```
should we use "publication" or "manuscript" here instead?

We created OpenPBTA as an open, real-time, reproducible analysis framework to genomically characterize pediatric brain tumors, bringing together basic and translational researchers, clinicians, and data scientists.

> We provide reusable code and data resources, paired with cloud-based availability of source and derived data resources, to the pediatric oncology community, encouraging interdisciplinary collaboration scientists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We provide reusable code and data resources, paired with cloud-based availability of source and derived data resources, to the pediatric oncology community, encouraging interdisciplinary collaboration.
```

> To our knowledge, this initiative represents the first large-scale, collaborative, open analysis of genomic data coupled with open manuscript writing, wherein we comprehensively analyzed the largest cohort of pediatric brain tumors to date.

Author: Just giving this a bump @jharenza  :)

> To our knowledge, this initiative represents the first large-scale, collaborative, open analysis of genomic data coupled with open manuscript writing, wherein we comprehensively analyzed the largest cohort of pediatric brain tumors to date.

Reviewer: I think it is probably better if we modify, given there are a few 1000 tumor pubs for MB and DIPG alone. Adam likes to say that this is the largest cohort of pediatric brain tumors with multiomic data, longitudinal clinical data, imaging, and pathology reports... so I think there are some qualifiers we need.

"To our knowledge, this initiative represents the first large-scale, collaborative, open analysis of genomic data coupled with open manuscript writing, wherein we comprehensively analyzed the PBTA." 

OR 

"To our knowledge, this initiative represents the first large-scale, collaborative, open analysis of genomic data coupled with open manuscript writing, wherein we comprehensively analyzed the PBTA, the largest cohort of pediatric brain tumors with multi-omic profiling and longitudinal clinical and imaging data."

Using available WGS, WXS, and RNA-Seq data, we generate high-confidence consensus SNV and CNV calls, prioritized putative oncogenic fusions, and established over 40 scalable and rigorously-reviewed modules to perform common downstream cancer genomics analyses.
We detected expected patterns of genomic lesions, mutational signatures, and aberrantly regulated signaling pathways across multiple pediatric brain tumor histologies.

Assembling large, pan-histology cohorts of fresh frozen samples and associated clinical phenotypes and outcomes requires a multi-year, multi-institutional framework, like those provided by CBTN and PNOC.

> As such, uniform clinical molecular subtyping was largely not performed for most of this cohort at the time of diagnosis and/or surgery,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As such, uniform clinical molecular subtyping was largely not performed for this cohort at the time of sample collection.
```

> Since DNA methylation data for these samples were yet available to classify molecular subtypes, we created RNA- and DNA-based subtyping modules aligned with WHO molecularly-defined diagnoses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since DNA methylation data for these samples were not available to classify molecular subtypes, we created RNA- and DNA-based subtyping modules aligned with WHO molecularly-defined diagnoses.
```

> We manually curated any known subtypes from pathology reports and/or free text clinical data fields.

Reviewer: We _only_ did this for MB, so I would take this out or add to the MB portion

Author: Ok, going to port this into methods..

> For unclassified tumors, we worked closely with pathologists and clinicians to assign research-grade integrated diagnoses for 60% of tumors while discovering incorrectly diagnosed or mis-identified samples in the OpenPBTA cohort.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We worked closely with pathologists and clinicians to assign research-grade integrated diagnoses for 60% of tumors while discovering incorrectly diagnosed or mis-identified samples in the OpenPBTA cohort.
```

For example, we subtyped medulloblastoma tumors, of which only 35% (43/122) had prior subtype information from pathology reports, using `MMS2` or `MedulloClassifier` [@doi:10.1186/s13029-016-0053-y; @doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1008263] and subsequently applied the consensus of these methods to subtype all medulloblastomas.

We advanced the integrative analyses and cross-cohort comparison via a number of validated modules.
We used an expression classifier to determine whether tumors have dysfunctional _TP53_ [@doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2018.03.076] and the EXTEND algorithm to determine their degree of telomerase activity using a 13-gene signature [@doi:10.1038/s41467-020-20474-9].

> Interestingly, we found that hypermutant HGGs universally displayed _TP53_ dysregulation, in contrast to adult cancers like colorectal cancer and gastric adenocarcinoma in whose hypermutated tumors  _TP53_ dysregulation is less common [@doi:10.18632/oncotarget.22783; @https://doi.org/10.1038/NATURE13480].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Interestingly, we found that hypermutant HGGs universally displayed _TP53_ dysregulation, in contrast to adult cancers like colorectal cancer and gastric adenocarcinoma in which hypermutated tumors  _TP53_ dysregulation is less common [@doi:10.18632/oncotarget.22783; @https://doi.org/10.1038/NATURE13480].
```

Author: ```suggestion
Interestingly, we found that hypermutant HGGs universally displayed _TP53_ dysregulation, in contrast to adult cancers like colorectal cancer and gastric adenocarcinoma in which hypermutated tumors with  _TP53_ dysregulation are less common [@doi:10.18632/oncotarget.22783; @https://doi.org/10.1038/NATURE13480].
```

For example, the OpenPBTA RNA fusion filtering module led to the development of the R package _annoFuse_ [@doi:10.1186/s12859-020-03922-7] and an R Shiny application [_shinyFuse_](http://shiny.imbei.uni-mainz.de:3838/shinyFuse/).
Leveraging OpenPBTA's medulloblastoma subtyping and immune deconvolution analyses, Dang and colleagues showed that SHH tumors are enriched with monocyte and microglia-derived macrophages, which may accumulate following radiation therapy [@doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2021.108917].
Expression and CNV analyses demonstrated that _GPC2_ is a highly expressed and copy-number gained immunotherapeutic target in ETMRs, medulloblastomas, choroid plexus carcinomas, H3 wildtype high-grade gliomas, and DMGs.
Foster and colleagues therefore developed a chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) directed against _GPC2_, which shows preclinical efficacy in mouse models [@doi:10.1136/jitc-2021-004450].

> Another study harnessed OpenPBTA to integrate germline variants, discovering that pediatric HGG patients with alternative telomere lengthening are enriched for pathogenic or likely pathogenic germline variants in the MMR pathway, possess oncogenic _ATRX_ mutations, and have increased TMB [@doi:10.1093/neuonc/noac278].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another study harnessed OpenPBTA to integrate germline variants, discovering that pediatric HGG patients with alternative telomere lengthening are enriched for pathogenic or likely pathogenic germline variants in the MMR pathway, possess oncogenic _ATRX_ mutations and have increased TMB [@doi:10.1093/neuonc/noac278].
```

Moreover, OpenPBTA has enabled a framework to support real-time integration of clinical trial subjects as they enrolled on the PNOC008 high-grade glioma clinical trial [@clinicaltrials:NCT03739372] or PNOC027 medulloblastoma clinical trial [@clinicaltrials:NCT05057702], allowing researchers and clinicians to link tumor biology to translational impact through clinical decision support during tumor board discussions.

> Finally, as part of the NCI's Childhood Cancer Data Initiative (CCDI), OpenPBTA was recently expanded into OpenPedCan, a pan-pediatric cancer effort ([https://github.com/PediatricOpenTargets/OpenPedCan-analysis](https://github.com/PediatricOpenTargets/OpenPedCan-analysis)) which enabled creation of the pediatric Molecular Targets Platform ([https://moleculartargets.ccdi.cancer.gov/](https://moleculartargets.ccdi.cancer.gov/)) in support of the RACE Act.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, as part of the NCI's CCDI, OpenPBTA was recently expanded into OpenPedCan, a pan-pediatric cancer effort ([https://github.com/PediatricOpenTargets/OpenPedCan-analysis](https://github.com/PediatricOpenTargets/OpenPedCan-analysis)) which enabled creation of the pediatric Molecular Targets Platform ([https://moleculartargets.ccdi.cancer.gov/](https://moleculartargets.ccdi.cancer.gov/)) in support of the RACE Act.
```

An additional, large-scale cohort of >1,500 tumor samples and associated germline DNA is undergoing harmonization as part of CBTN CCDI-Kids First NCI and Common Fund project ([https://commonfund.nih.gov/kidsfirst/2021X01projects#FY21_Resnick](https://commonfund.nih.gov/kidsfirst/2021X01projects#FY21_Resnick)) and will be immediately integrated with OpenPBTA data through OpenPedCan.
OpenPBTA has paved the way for new modes of collaborative data-driven discovery using open, reproducible, and scalable analyses that will continue to grow over time.

> We anticipate this foundational work will have an ongoing, long-term impact for translational pediatric oncology researchers, ultimately accelerating impact and leading to improved outcomes for children with cancer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We anticipate this foundational work will have an ongoing, long-term impact for pediatric oncology researchers, ultimately accelerating translation and leading to improved outcomes for children with cancer.
```
